# May 26, 2020 Incubator Call Notes

**Attendees:**: Jack-Works (JWK), Shu-yu Guo (SYG), Yulia Startsev (YSV), Jason Orendorff (JO), Leo Balter (LBR), Caridy Patiño (CP), Mark Miller (MM), Brad Decker (MetaMask - New Delegate), John-David Dalton (JDD), Michael Ficarra (MF), Erik Marks (REK), Dan Finlay (DJF), Daniel Ehrenberg (DE), Jordan Harband (JH)

# Realms update

(Caridy presents [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1FMQB8fu059zSJOtC3uOCbBCYiXAcvHojxzcDjoVQYAo/edit#slide=id.p))

Recent changes:

A lot of simplifications, closing all remaining questions about the API:

Removed thisValue option and accessor
Removing options bag all together
Renamed global accessor to globalThis
Remove Realm.prototype.evaluate() method
Remove Realm.prototype.intrinsics() method
Adding Realm.prototype.import() method

Two open questions we are trying to address here:

Implementers concern:
"Mechanical concerns about how Realms would work with HTML"
DOM Layering is work-in-progress
"Realms is counter to the current design principles of the web platform"
direct access to other "globals" discussion (Issue #238)

JO: What does detach mean?

CP: Similar to how iframe detach works, results in disabling access to url loading since we do not have a reference to a domain/origin.

SYG: Browsers are inconsistent in what they do here, so this may not be web compatible.

MM: Whatever the browser behavior is for detaching, the concepts introduced by this proposal are independent of that.

Presentation ends. Queue Discussion

SYG: Topic is better motivated use cases. My question is when I polled some internal google devs, which is not representative of the ecosystem, but similarly from feedback in the framework call, we asked “what would you use this for?”. Generally people answered that they would use this for sandboxing / security capabilities, which are not present in the current proposal. It seems like they would start using it from a misunderstanding. I understand CP said they would add an explainer, but we are still missing the use case.

CP: I would like us to focus on the technicalities of the proposal rather than its purpose. There has been some more information gathering. Wrt the security gathering aspect, we are interested in integrity and virtualization and how you could achieve virtualization in the browser. The browser already has a security “model”, the cross-domain model.

SYG: Returning to the questions -- regarding the mechanical aspect, question 1 from the slide. Since Realms could be seen as a direct competitor with iframe in some respect, a requirement for me to move to stage 3 on this is that this proposal can be layered with the html spec in a way that the editors of that spec would be satisfied.

CP: Two main distinctions between Realms and iframes: first, an iframe is detachable, while a Realm is not. Therefore DOM semantics to control detachability are not applicable. The realm will die out when the window is closed, while the fate of the iframe is more uncertain.

Second, in a newly created iframe, you have unforgeables that you will not be able to remove, If your idea is to do any virtualization to emulate some environment, you won’t be able to remove those unforgeables.

Example: window proxy, window proto chain, window properties.

Newly created realm has no unforgeables.

MM: I would use the term virtualizable or replaceable rather than forgeable. I want to reserve the term forging for a different set of concepts.

SYG: Clarifying question, about the image, the non arrow lines are not any kind of scope lookups?

CP: Yes, this is a live line(?). The yellow boxes are created by the window, and the pink one is created by Realm B.

You import modules into it in a brand new module graph, and that’s all you get.

The third line is the information that a host can store to associate this realm. I believe that can be done in the host defined internal slot that is defined for the realm record. This could be a static reference.

This is not even a lookup reference. You can just simply pick up the realm record from the incubator realm (?)

When you create a window or a worker, you will have a back pointer to the same realm, the realm that contained the semantics, and once you create a new Realm out of it, you can just pick up that value from the incubator Realm.

MM: A third point of how it differs from iframes -- it is host independent and portable.

Sometimes you just want a new set of primordials, and so today you have to create a whole iframe, etc, or in node a new process.

SYG: I need more time to digest, but at first glance I like the lifetime subjugation to window or worker, but it also gives me concern that it is distinguished from iframes, a concept which exists now, which makes me want more “ok” from the integration HTML part. That will be a huge part if this will ship or not. I don’t want us to get to stage 3 and discover from HTML there are concerns about layering.

MM: Can anyone here speak to those concerns?

DE: I can try to summarize the concerns. The semantics I proposed for HTML integration are: each realm will have an environment settings object which basically forwards up to the enclosing HTML object. This includes for module imports the relative to absolute path conversion, anything about event handling etc. All such things are forwarded up to the original iframe, window, worker or worklet that the Realm was created within. That’s what the HostDefined internal field is used for in real HTML integration. I made a PR against HTML to define this. There were a list of mechanical concerns that weren’t addressed at the time, but I believe that those can be resolved.

Then there was the high-level concern that we shouldn’t be doing this at all because people can mistake it for a security mechanism. All mechanisms like this should be able to be separated into a different process that can be communicated with async, for purposes of security. Realms are inherently sync, which violates that principle.

MM: We are very consistently using the term integrity rather than security. Closures are an isolation boundary. No one argues each closure should go into a separate process.

The isolation of closures is strong, there is no way to violate it. But this has nothing to do with what browser engineers call “security”.

DE: Private fields are another example where we have integrity. There are previous stories out there about these things providing security. Would require an active education effort to explain the difference.

JWK: what about limit any information such as timezones or interpretation of module specifiers to the parent of the realm, so that the realm does not need to know about these things.

MM: The issue of customizing the import behavior, the module-loading behavior, as well as things like time zone and the rest, in coordination between the realm proposal and the compartments proposal, both sides agree that all the customization should move into the compartment proposal. Since then there’s also been on the compartment side talk of splitting that PAI into two proposals, one to take on all the import customization—[audio dropped out:

JWK: But the primordials in the compartments are immutable, but what if I want the customization of module specifiers.

MM: That would be in the proposal for compartments.

The proposal would introduce the compartments API and how it relates to Realms.
If you create a compartment within a realm that has different loading behavior and then within that compartment you create a new compartment, that new compartment gets the customization that you pass to it at construction time.

And so compartments can delegate all of the customization that they are created with.

CP: To add to that if you want full virtualization, then you will most likely be making a compartment, and then a realm based on that compartment. Then you would be able to do what you mentioned. The realm is about a brand new set of intrinsics and the ability to evaluate code.

JWK: Thanks for clarifying. I thought of compartments as a smaller version of Realms. I did not know that you can create a Realm within a compartment.

MM: There’s been a lot of refactoring of the relationship between Realms and Compartments since the concept was born.

SYG: Seems we’re done with the last question.

JO: How is the auto-forwarding behavior mentioned by DE to be reconciled with virtualizability? How does that work with having an abstraction boundary. When I think about a closure I have specific guarantees in mind. When it comes to realms I don’t have a clear picture.

What are the guarantees of Realms? Does it have to do with lexical scoping? Virtualization is clearly good, and that cuts across the behavior of the primordials in the new thing to the old thing.

DE: There’s only a certain set of things that are forwarded. [cut out; connection unstable:

CP: Once we have the compartment API, the compartment can implement the semantics of a window or worker. Anything that happens in any realm that is created by that compartment, would be forwarded to this compartment. With these two together you would be able to virtualize a window or a worker. The second item is exactly what Daniel said, you need to know what you are forwarding. Any operation with requires you to know if the realm is detached. You will have to forward that to the nearest window. The example of the promise is that the realm delegates to the host for the timing of the next microtask queue item.

DE: I’m not sure what you mean about that Promise point.

CP: I refer to the case of Chrome, not sure about other browsers. You detach and then try to do promise.resolve, you will never resolve.

MM: This is a point that I haven’t heard before.

Promises are a purely JS host-independent concept, except the scheduling of the job queue. Is it that in a detached window the scheduling of the job queue is disrupted?

CP: Yes, Chrome does that.

MM: Is it accurate to say that the promise itself is resolved, but there is no way to observe it because the then callback never happens in the job queue?

CP: That’s correct. That’s the behavior we see today in Chrome.

SYG: To wrap up Jason’s question, is that clarifying question done?

JO: I think that the answer is that the amount of auto-forwarding is finite and each case will be exposed in a separate api proposal?

MM: Maybe. I want to be clear on compartments & virtualization: We’ve encountered concerns by Google about providing all the host-hooks needed to virtualize a host. So we’re splitting the Compartment API into two proposals:

What is needed to virtualize import behavior, since it can go forward without addressing these concerns.

One where we negotiate with browser-makers to find what the true concerns are, and what host-hooks can go forward.

We may never achieve full host virtualizability.

SYG: Next up on the queue is myself. For the larger design questions, have you requested a TAG review? If not, can I recommend that you do so? Considering that this proposal has significant implications for the host. I now understand that the host semantics of this proposal are significantly different from iframes, and a TAG review would be prudent under the circumstances.

MM: Yes, that is fine.

CP: Sure we can figure something out.

DE: TAG reviews have been going well for other TC39 proposals. I recommend you expand the explainer and make it clear what the use case is, and request review early.

SYG: Next up is Dan.

DE: General thing: Some people, like Jack, say they want Compartment features to use Realms. Other TC39 members, too. I want to know how useful Realms will be without hooks. I like how minimal it is, and how you’ve made it more minimal (on my suggestion). But I want to know about the tradeoff of removing virtualizability when it is often presented as a step on the road to compartments.

CP: Right, so in the specific case, for example at Salesforce we’ll probably never use compartments, at least not in the near future. What we need is a more simplified thing. There’s a lot you can do with just the Realm, without the full virtualization. Examples of that include when users are changing APIs within a realm, you can make some modifications to the newly created realm, you can still perform a lot of virtualization work by modifying the newly created realm, which gets you about halfway there, because you’ll still need to transpile things like imports, but most people will probably use the Realms API with transpiled code anyway.

That’s what we do specifically at Salesforce.

LBR: WRT to the usefulness of the Realms,  we plan to expand the use cases for the API in our next meeting. We will present on the expanded list then.

CP: Since we have 8 minutes left, I would like to get a sense of if we should present an update in the next meeting?

SYG: I think the biggest hurdle right now is Chrome -- I don’t want to speak for other browser vendors -- and a clarification of intended use cases.

DE: Can you clarify?

SYG: I’m thinking about that Realms can’t be made async, and have to remain async. If it comes back from the TAG that this is not OK, and counter to their design goals, we can’t move forward to stage 3. I want to know if there’s strong pushback from the HTML folks before we can proceed to stage 3. If we are encouraging sync code, that is a bigger concern than the mechanical questions.

CP: What is the exact problem with synchronous communication between globals?

SYG: Synchronous communications between globals, as you identified, I think I agree that it’s the higher-order problem. The synchronous execution of code… That’s just a design point. If the synchronous communication between globals is not something that architects at the web platform level do not want, then that’s a significant problem for this proposal.

That is just a design point. Here is a new way to take code and evaluate it. There is no way to isolate it. Architects at the web platform level do not want that.

MM: We all agree we need to open a dialogue, but trying to speculate on what their concerns are while they’re not in the room may be past the point of diminishing returns.

SYG: Sounds good. Will follow up offline.

