# June 16, 2020 Incubator Call Notes

**Attendees:** Rick Button (RBU), Leo Balter (LBR), Shu-yu Guo (SYG), Jordan Harband (JHD), Benjamin Coe (BCE), Kevin Gibbons (KG), Chengzhong Wu (CZW), Richard Gibson (RGN)

## UUID

Presenter: Benjamin Coe

* [proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-uuid)
* [slides]()

BCE: We got to Stage 1 a while back. Hoping to get momentum picked up again.

BCE: *Presents*

BCE: First thing I want to talk about is API design. I'd like to get the temperature of the room on it.

BCE: I was proposing in the last meeting that we start really simple, and we use the term “random UUID”. We had a couple discussions on GiHub, thinking the method name would be “uuid”, if you are just looking for randomness, there is no replacement for v4, it is the maximum amount of entropy you can have in a uuid in the IETF spec. We could expose an options bag or UUID class. I was thinking you could do something like an algorithm option. For someone who wants a random set of bytes, v4 is what you want, but there are algos that are in the works, v6 might go in in August, it is sortable. I was thinking that if we design the API appropriately we would be able to pass an alternate algo in the spec. It means we are future proofing ourselves. There is an option to get a byte array back from the UUID library rather than a string. The existing userland library just allows you to pass an array, and the array gets filled with the bytes. This is a bit of a strawperson proposal but I wanted to get peoples feelings on where we are landing on the API?

SYG: You are proposing a global function, instead of on some object?

BCE: Great question. I had a global function in my mind when I presented at the last meeting. I could imagine it being on - if the proposal was to put randomBytes on Crypto, which is what WebCrypto puts it on. We could collide with the WebCrypto spec. Do you think we don’t want to leak another thing on the global?

SYG: I don’t have much against having a global.

KG: I also like globals.

BCE: We have the JSON global, or Date or JSON, seems like it's its own distinct thing.

SYG: Thinking of devs that are using UUID, while it requires a crypto source, does that enter devs minds when they want a UUID?

BCE: No, good point. That is why I want to start with a simple API surface. Most devs need a uuid, and pull in a uuid library. I think it is the long tail of users that want to turn the knobs on the feature. These are definitely advanced features. We could start with a really simple API surface like this. It was interesting seeing the V6 algorithm get traction. V6 is the hypothetical algo that is sortable and random. It doesn’t have adoption yet, it might not become part of the spec.

BCE: What other examples do we have of parameter overriding?

KG: This is getting a little more into the - I’m not super set on any of this. I’m not sure there is much use case of populating an existing array. You could have a type parameter in the options bag.

BCE: If you set encoding you might get a buffer instead of a string. TypeScript is perfectly capable of typing that, I don’t think that people will run into too much difficulty.

BCE: I was not at the meeting where CSPRNG was proposed, but was excited to see where the proposal was landed. Could you have something get to Stage 2 contingent on another proposal or do we have to keep these proposals in line?

SYG: They don’t have to be in lock step but if one depends on the other then it can’t advance past the dependency.

BCE: …

SYG: I think there are other --- here.

SYG: I’ll say what Mozilla has said, I won’t try to motivate it because I don’t want to speak for them. They said that this should be moved to WebCrypto. She [YSV] didn’t mention the csprng proposal but I imagine it would apply to that as well.

KG: The csprng proposal is interesting in that it is not different from the thing in WebCrypto. As far as I can tell it is a proposal for environments that do not have WebCrypto. Putting it in WebCrypto is not a solution from Ron’s point of view.

BCE: With YSV’s perspective, the spec itself should move to W3C?

SYG: It’s not that she is against the feature, but that the layering is incorrect. Given that WebCrypto exists - the same arguments that have been surfaced in committee before. If we are taking WebCrypto - taking stuff piecemeal, it doesn’t seem great. There are folks that think uuid is a language level feature, and that we shouldn’t hold it up because there is support for it in another layer of the platform. Other tacks may be available. I don’t see why we also need to expose csprng api to expose a uuid api.

JHD: uuid introduces a new source of entropy, the SES crowd is super opposed to it. If the source of entropy can be specified (virtualizable) it would address their concerns. Hopefully WebCrypto would be able to move to it.

SYG: WebCrypto would use our thing?

JHD: No let me explain - the folks that want to track timing observability - the canonical source for randomness that all other random sources look to, there would only be one thing to virtualize, and all sources of randomness would be hijacked. That isn’t currently possible now, but my impressions is that there would be a hope that it would converge.

SYG: That makes sense, I just don’t think it is a concern I care about. That seems like something where someone added a rider to a proposal.

KG: The goal is that you want to be able to virtualize the application. Ideally you want to be able to do that in a way that doesn’t update too frequently - if there is a source of truth for random numbers, then it works fine. If every time something that involves randomness is added you have to virtualize that new thing, it becomes harder. If we are going to add randomness, let’s add virtualizability.

JHD: Whereas if we create a forward compatible hook point I don’t have to think about it.

BCE: It is in my opinion not a Web-only API. One of the biggest sources of bugs is not having a good enough source of randomness. React Native recently was using a poor source for randomness, because you get a uuid and assume it is good when it is not. It is a much more complicated problem than the proposal itself.

LBR: I think it might be useful if we can get feedback from Moddable. There might be some use cases where Moddable can benefit from this.

BCE: URI is W3C spec? YSV’s point is we can still take this proposal to W3C and still go wide on platforms.

SYG: Let me respond to that. I think from Chrome’s point of view, it is fine to go to WebCrypto, it is not an issue for Chrome perspective on the web platform, if you squint it is also OK for node, it has precedent for taking things from the web for interop. We do send a different signal - if we move this out of TC39, not to devs, but to other platform engineers and others working in the standards space, that we aren’t interested in standard library features.

KG: I want to talk about the signal it sends. The thing that I would say is that I think that uuid conceptually fits into the existing crypto namespace on the web platform quite well. It feels like to me a similar thing - mostly because it is required to be a csprng, and v4 is large enough to be unguessable. It feels like the Crypto namespace is a reasonable place to put it. I would hope that the signal it would send is that not that TC39 isn’t interested in a stdlib, but that if there is a better place for it to go, it should go there. We shouldn’t put things into the global namespace as opposed to an existing namespace.

JHD: You mean stick it on their object in a way that doesn’t clash?

KG: No, but that it goes through the crypto group. My hope isn’t that it signals that TC39 isn’t interested, but that we don’t step on anyone’s toes.

JHD: The crypto group is spun down.

SYG: True, but it can be brought back.

JHD: When the web has stuff that can be used outside the web, it should generally be promoted into the language. WebCrypto is generally useful. I would rather see a world where we work with crypto or W3C to bring it to TC39 at which point adding UUID to it can be done before/during/after. Rather than just hoping that all of the JS engines we care about pull in the pieces of the web spec that are important.

KG: I am happy with that too, I don’t think it needs to be done in a specific order. I don’t think BCE needs to pull in Crypto just to add UUID. We could recharter the W3C group for both things.

JHD: In order for it to land in the language, it would be important for TC39 to get involved. I agree with the ordering and not forcing BCE to do the work. If UUID just goes into WebCrypto, it might go in with a form that we don’t want in the language.

BCE: To me, things like “oh shoot we’ve been deploying something insecure to phones for a year” shows why it is valuable to have in the language. More and more people are writing applications that are more complicated, and uuid is often used to do this. That isn’t going to work 10 years from now when you have 4 million UUIDs running in an app on your phone. It should be guaranteed to have it on the platform.

SYG: To JHD - I think you are making a point about how things “should be” from a layering perspective. Because TC39 is the core language body, and this feels like a core language feature. One, I think org friction is real, I think that it ends up trumping how we want things to be. Other than that, I don’t think there is a notion of a “core language” for the developer. It is not a useful thing to care about.

JHD: I’ve been spending years in IRC, and a bunch of people will reply with “that isn’t in the language, it is on the web”, the rise of Node has made it matter. The fact that they can’t pull in things like “fetch”, eg, makes it more important. I think it is growing, and it does matter and will continue to matter as environments multiply.

SYG: Let me qualify. For web devs, this does not matter.

JHD: Sure, but web devs are not the only audience -

SYG: That’s correct but by far the largest.

JHD: Sure - that means we should not obstruct them, but we should still avoid obstructing non-web devs in the process.

SYG: In practice, it doesn’t make much sense to harp on what is in the core language and what is not. I think what you are saying is that there is a non-zero risk that if it goes to WebCrypto that it doesn’t reach the users we want to reach.

JHD: Given that uuid is used in node, and would be useful in Moddable and related envs, the number of web devs (that couldn’t use Math.random equally well as UUID; there is of course a group that definitely needs UUID) - I suspect that the actual web usage that needs UUID doesn’t dwarf non-web usage of UUID.

BCE: There is a build of node that pulls in Crypto, if it were to go to WebCrypto, then it wouldn’t be supported today in Node.

JHD: Devs would expect this capability on the server to match the client, particularly for dually server and client-rendered apps, like React etc.

LBR: The biggest trouble that I hear is that the things they want to use - they want them in both environments. I have disagreements, I think it would be better in a namespace, but I understand and respect the concern from KG, this would be a case where we get some feedback for how we can match this work. I don’t think it would be a problem for TC39 to work on this, if we involve TAG we can avoid stepping on someone’s toes. I think it makes sense to continue doing this work.

KG: I think that the CSPRNG proposal had explored doing is adding a Crypto object to TC39 that would just have a copy of the getRandomValues spec text from W3C, ideally in coordination. With the hope that it is a compatible extension to add other things to the namespace. If we added a Crypto namespace, if we never add anything that conflicts with the web platform, if we want to add something from the web platform, ideally it would be a straight copy, and discuss otherwise. If we added a new Crypto namespace, then we can add the randomUUID property there. That seems fine. We wouldn’t need to pull in all of Crypto.

BCE: It sounds like what is being said here - reaching out to W3C and working in parallel might be the path forward.

JHD: To be clear what KG is suggesting matches my aspirational goal. We can separately and in the future pull in an alternative or pull it in wholesale.

SYG: BCE, how would that crypto namespace - if the intention is a barebones skeleton - would that work for node?

BCE: I think that we would make the case that we should - it was stalled, but maybe we just need to un-stall the effort. I don’t like the idea of pulling in the whole spec, but like the idea of plucking a couple of things that is pertinent to both standards bodies.

SYG: Before we move on, YSV has joined. We did discuss Mozilla’s concern about moving this to W3C. KG’s concrete suggestion, if we could come up with a Crypto object, and here is a CSPRNG and a UUID thing on it, and leave the rest for WebCrypto to fill in.

KG: CSPRNG already exists on the web platform. We would just move it into TC39.

YSV: Remind me if I remember this correctly, we had a discussion a few months ago?

KG: What I am talking about came up in Feb.

YSV: I raised this to the powers that be, that it isn’t actually possible. WebCrypto had finished their mandate and the person who had commented didn't have the power to move it into TC39. WebCrypto is being rechartered right now. The review internally of CSPRNG was that since this already exists in WebCrypto, this should remain a web API, and shouldn’t be replicated in the language.

JHD: Can you clarify that position?

SYG: I think she has hinted that it is higher up the chain.

JHD: I’m not attempting to turn this into changing your mind. If you could explain it - great, or if in the future you have an explanation that is shareable, that would be appreciated.

YSV: The argument that I have in this direction is about centering on the web so I am not sure this will be convincing.

JHD: Technical or political?

YSV: Both, but maybe more political.

BCE: Is there someone we could be engaging?

YSV: I’m working on it. I’m trying to find alternatives. There are two ways to move forward with this. Rather than moving piecemeal Crypto into TC39, we come up with a full story for crypto in TC39, that is a lot of work. Other one is, WebCrypto exists, and we put it into WebCrypto.

YSV: TC39 can up stream to WebCrypto, or It could be host-defined.

BCE: That is something we discussed before.

JHD: Anyone that wants to do client rendering - they need to have parity, anything that affects that render matters. UUID is a part of that. That is what my response would be to your company’s internal pushback. WebCrypto isn’t sufficient.

YSV: I raised this, and raised IOT. The response was Node is implementing WebCrypto. It is not a priority for us. My understanding is, they would have been fine with UUID as long as csprng remained in WebCrypto. If we could figure out a way to do that, it would work. Right now is a weird time, we are having an all-hands meeting. I would propose that we should setup another meeting. I’m working with our security team to discuss WebCrypto rechartering and I have discussed the idea of crypto in JS before.

SYG: I don’t think YSV or Mozilla is alone. Other people in Chrome have strong opinions that it should be in WebCrypto. The important thing is that we get a good UUID into the platform. I would think about- if we go the WebCrypto route, can we get more support from Node to implement if not the entire WebCrypto proposal, but at least this.

DE: We are looking into that also.
