# June 30, 2020 Incubator Call Notes

**Attendees:** Rick Button (RBU), Richard Gibson (RGN), Yulia Startsev (YSV), Shu-yu Guo (SYG), Leo Balter (LEO)

## Deep Path Properties

Presenter: Rick Button (RBU)

- [slides](button.dev/talks/deep-path-properties-incubator-june-30-2020.pdf)

RBU: This is for asking general feedback about the proposal.

RBU: *presents*

YSV: Clarifying question: this example of complex2 (TODO which slide?), is it functionally the same as the previous example where you're spreading each property shallowly?

RBU: Functionally the same as does the same thing or observably the same? Yes. For Records this is simple because you can't observably tell the difference between a Record and a Record created with the identity spread. Don't have to worry about the identity of the individual components. With Objects it'd create a bunch of new Objects, but with Records it'd "create" a bunch of new Records but it wouldn't be observably different.

YSV: When we're talking about where we're storing this data, are we pointing to the same object or is there a deep copy?

RBU: If you imagine how a deep path property will work, it effectively means the entire path from the root of the Object to the leaf you're updating will effectively be a new Record. You need to update each of those levels with a new value that'll point to the new sublevel. The trick with Records is that there's no observable difference because they're primitives. 

YSV: So from the implementer's POV it's okay to share data.

RBU: Yeah, any part of the path that doesn't change.

RBU: *resumes presenting*

RBU: Open question is what to do about Objects. Objects are much more complicated to reason about. Currently for objects, the whole path would create new objects all the way down. Hard to reason about which objects are new/old.

Next open question is syntax. People suggested alternative syntax at the last TC39.

YSV: What specific syntax problems?

RBU: Nothing necessarily wrong with this syntax. If we want to support objects, the syntax we currently have doesn't necessarily express semantics enough. Because which objects are created and which objects are copied is implicit based off what the path is. Syntax doesn't really describe that well. Not sure if this is something that can be solved by syntax but want to make it more obvious. If solution is "... is fine". Ron Buckton has suggested the moustache operator (.{). Mark Miller suggested something else. Nothing concrete.

YSV: So this is all about objects. I'm not super convinced about objects getting this. I don't see a good way to not make this super slow and take up a lot of memory. I want to understand better the use cases that users are following. Do you have any examples?

RBU: Not at this time. I can gather examples and follow up. This comes up a lot in libraries like Redux. Objects are used right now. Internally at Bloomberg people want to use this for Redux. Maybe the answer is to use it only for Records.

YSV: That's exactly the question I have. React created this pattern inspired by immutable data. Now that we're adding immutability to the language I'm not sure we should continue to allow deep path properties for objects if we already have Records and Tuples. If they're trying to achieve immutability, they should use Records and Tuples. If they're trying to use something else (like copying all the objects except certain fields), I want to understand the use case better.

RBU: I don't think copying objects except for fields is that common. Can't imagine where you'd want to do this thing but wouldn't be satisfied with Records. We've heard opinions since Records can't contain Objects naturally, if you have something you can't contain in Records you can't use deep path property syntax if it's only available for Records. I'm not as concerned about that. Most important thing here is for Records to have this syntax. Heard feedback in committee people want this for objects as well. Ron Buckton mentioned that he wanted it for symmetry. Between Records and Objects.

YSV: I'd explicitly argue against that stance. Records should be distinct and have abilities that are distinct from objects. Objects are good for quickly iterating. Records need a little thinking ahead and should be treated in a different way. If that's the only argument for symmetry I don't think that's a strong argument personally. Honestly if it was super easy and cheap to implement this I wouldn't take this stance, but the cost is passed onto users. Encouraging this approach cost end users more.

With regard to the syntax, I found myself skipping over the dot. You know when you're skimming you look to the end of the word and skip the in-between bits. E.g. in counters[0].value I'd skip over that dot. Might lead to programmers missing vital information while reading. For this reason I like Immer's setIn syntax. First of all I like what you designed here and find it appealing. I like what Immer does but Immer is very verbose. Also setIn should be called something different. What I like about it is that it's visually very distinct from a key. I don't really have a problem with the syntax as it is but I can see myself making a mistake.

SYG: What is the implementation concern? You said high memory cost. Closures hide costs. What's the line-drawing exercise here?

YSV: My main point here is that there is a compelling use case. If there is, then it's probably fine. If not, then the encouraged continued use of objects for immutable-like cases is bad. It's like introducing division to strings. Creating that kind of flexibility seems too much. Mainly language philosophy point that I have.

SYG: To clarify then, the impl concerns isn't the high-order bit.

RBU: Yeah, from my POV I'm fine with not adding them for objects. When we push this further we'd need to get both sides in the room.

YSV: If you wanna troll committee you could use with.

RBU: Originally we did use with!

YSV: To be clear, I'm not against objects but that we should have clear use case for objects.

SYG: WHy is mutation not expressive enough?

RBU: Redux wants to create objects that look immutable and never mutate them. In a world without Records and Tuples this pattern is common.

SYG: If the original motivation is to emulate immutable, I agree with Yulia about having this just for Records. Presumably this would be gated on Records so if you have access to this syntax you'd also have access to Records. If you want immutable, use Records then.

I guess maybe there's a mkdir -p use case for normal objects to create a deeply nested thing?

YSV: I'd discourage against that use case. It hides information and makes bugs hard to find.

RGN: This works without spread right? There are reasonable use cases for it if you define something then mutate it within the same literal.

RBU: Yes. I'll try to reach out to Mark and Ron and gather use cases.

YSV: If we do the homework and don't find other compelling use cases I'm ready to support you (RBU) in not doing this for objects.

RBU: One other thing. We talked about implementation burden on the object side. I'm interested in implementation burden for the Record side. Had a discussion with Keith Miller on IRC that Records would be similarly hiding computation. In the best case you can make it faster for Records. In the slow case it's just as slow as spreads.

YSV: In terms of burden it's really about how much memory we use.

RBU: There are techniques I can try to compile on the repo. There are techniques where if the Record is never referenced anywhere else you can just mutate it in-place.

YSV: SM team will look at in depth. Keith might be right. Maybe my performance point doesn't work for Records either, but i still think we shouldn't do it for objects.

SYG: CPU or just memory concern?

YSV: Memory.

RBU: My concern isn't that it must be fast. Ergonomics. It just can't be so slow that nobody wants to implement it.

YSV: I hope Records have enough static info that we can do something there.

SYG: A theme for VMs in the past few years, at least for V8, is that we don't go to the JITs that much anymore. The old assumptions of people writing hot loops doesn't really happen in practice. Proposed techniques like escape analysis are just not going to be possible in the interpreter and frontend. I suspect Keith is right. In the average case deep path properties are going to be no better than spreads.

RGN: Certainly not a major concern. Have you given thought to removal?

RBU: This has come up a bunch of time. No? Other than that it'd look neat. I don't know what it'd look like. If we did do removal it'd be a different proposal. Removal is orthogonal to deep path. If we do removal that would be better fit with objects.

LEO: Concerned about observability. Worried about observable steps in between.

RBU: Well you'd be able to observe the RHS of the properties since you have to evaluate the RHS. But Records are primitives. You can't observe the creation of them.

LEO: I need to see more of this. I have curiosity but I defer my curiosity to do a fuller investigation. Overall I like this a lot.
