# March 8, 2022 Incubator Call Notes

**Attendees**:
- J. S. Choi (JSC)
- Shu-yu Guo (SYG)
- Michael Ficarra (MF)
- Kevin Gibbons (KG)
- Richard Gibson (RGN)
- Jordan Harband (JHD)
- John Hax (JHX)

**Background**:
- [proposal-function-helpers](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-function-helpers)
- [Summary of proposal rejection](https://github.com/tc39-transfer/proposal-function-helpers/issues/17#issuecomment-953814353)
- [Plenary notes from proposal rejection](https://github.com/tc39/notes/blob/main/meetings/2021-10/oct-28.md#function-helpers))

# Function helper functions

JSC: I consider everyone here at least a stakeholder adding function helpers. Is everyone here familiar with the preso from November? Could recap.

MF: Any changes beyond what you presented?

JSC: No. To review, it was omnibus proposal of several small functions to be added to F.p. Idea is they're broadly useful to differing degrees. Committee rejected due to too broad, with idea of breaking them up. What should we do in general? On one extreme, include nothing. Other extreme as many as we can. Would be good to get general approach and temperature checks on individual functions. If there're any functions that weren't in the omnibus proposal might be good to get those too. Broadly speaking this mtg is to get general consensus for the general approach for what helper functions we should include in the core language. When I'm talking about hepler functions I'm talking about utility functions that act on callbacks. Generally higher-order. May be varying levels of political/religious/aesthetic attitudes to FP-vs-OOP and how many new callbacks we should create in the language. Broadly speaking these are functions that you plug into functions or create functions to plug into functions, basically useful callbacks. Identity, constant, pipe (adjunct to pipe operator). These are used a lot by users, it's a question of what general approach/criteria we should use for core language inclusion. One more thing to add before discussion.

Jordan, to briefly go over attitude of committee when things were rejected… `flow` and `pipe` composes functions together, lots of people have been asking for that. `const` returns a constant. `identity` returns whatever it's given. `nop` returns undefined. `once` calls callback only once. `throttle` and `debounce` are time-based stuff that depends on a lot of other stuff. Not going to consider `throttle` and `debounce` right now because committee was clear. `const` and `identity` and `nop` received pushback since they're just arrow functions. Advantages and disadvantages: `identity` would save reallocation. `once` there were no signals. `flow` and `pipe` non-controversial.

With that, opinions on general approach or specific functions?

JHD: I think non-controversial is misleading about `pipe` and `flow`. Lots of chatter and doubt about almost all of them on Matrix. Temperature of room was to split up the proposal so I don't think everyone voiced their thoughts. I'm pretty unsure about `pipe` and `flow`. That's not to say I'm against, want to understand better why useful.

JSC: Yeah I'd say `pipe` and `flow` were the least controversial but may receive pushback.

Any thoughts on criteria on what's useful to include in the language? Perhaps if it's useful for "functional programming". I'd think it's more general than that? Maybe `flow` and `pipe` won't be used outside of certain style, but `identity` probably useful more than that. Should we reject stuff based on utility for certain styles? Is it useless to try to come up with a general approach? Always case-by-case? This is all committee temperature stuff.

KG: I have a general feeling, which is I'd prefer to add things only when they are not already trivial and in particular, you mentioned downsides of `identity` and `const` being additional allocation. I don't care about that at all. The thing I care about is there're multiple ways to write a thing where previously there was only one way, and that one way was already very clear. Now they have to choose between `x => x` and `Function.identity`, which is quite a high cost. I don't like adding things that are trivial regardless of whether they'd be used in multiple styles or not.

For things that are not trivial I think they should be decided on a case-by-case basis. I have nothing against `flow` or `pipe` but I wouldn't personally use them. Would like to see someone in committee excited at least. `once` I'd use all the time for example and is annoying to write yourself.

MF: Very similar feedback as KG. The functions that are very simple and can be arrows, even though I'd be a frequent user of those it'd be fine to write those as arrows and I don't want to have to choose between arrows. Allocations probably won't matter ever. `once` is also most compelling out of this suite, been obvious to me for long time we should have it in standard.

JSC: `once` reminds me of an idea I didn't include in omnibus: the memoization function. But may bring complexity for how exactly to manage the cache. Worth thinking about is it worth bringing in memoization?

MF: Memoize, yes, it's a lot of code to write, but there's also a lot of decisions to make when writing a memoization functions. Decisions like what are equal things. It's gonna be hard for committee to make that decision for the users. I know we often do, and I think we often make the wrong decisions, but I think there're too many decisions for memoize.

JSC: `once` in comparison is relatively simple.

KG: Well there's arguably one problem. Some impls save the result and return it every time, some others return undefined on subsequent calls. Decision has to be made but I don't care which.

JSC: What I'm hearing is trivial functions should not be included in core language. It would introduce needless TIMTOWTDI ("there's more than one way to do it") for relatively little gain, like `const` `identity` `noop`. For `flow` and `pipe` no strong pushback, like "I don't know if I'd find this useful myself". `once` I'm seeing enthusiasm about. Memoization relatively complex probably wouldn't pursue due to configuration. Those are impressions I get so far. Fair characterizations?

MF, KG: Yeah.

JSC: I think those are pretty clear conclusions. Worth pursuing `once` first, and `flow` `pipe`. Maybe see how `pipe` operator works. I know at least TAB is enthusiastic about them. Not urgent, pipe operator will chug along at its own pace. For `once`, I figured it'd return a cached thing on subsequent calls.

KG: Annoying or unclear would be good criteria for inclusion. I was also excited about `unbindThis`.

JHD: Easy to write but really hard to intuit what to write.

JSC: [I'd probably present `unthis` too, probably will be called `demethodize`, if you wanna bikeshed please do so on the issue](https://github.com/js-choi/proposal-function-un-this/issues/1).

SYG: I would be skeptical of anything holistic for FP or OO, rather than as a case-by-case "this helps users". E.g. I'd be pretty against any proposal that tries to push for a specific kind of FP. For Pipeline, now that we've settled on something that explicitly does not encourage point-free, I would be against anything which is specifically for point-free as a matter of a style. But on a case-by-case basis we should decide based on whether they help users.

JSC: demethodize is an edge case. The question of whether something encourages one style or another is not clear, and it's not clear if it should be syntax or a function.

SYG: I've seen enough uses of it because `this` and the receiver are common enough in the language already that you need to do it, not because they're trying to compose eight functions to pass to something else.

KG: Agreed, it's something you already need because `this` is in the language regardless of style.

JSC: Not to mention the web platform, yes.

SYG: As an example something that I would be against, something that just manipulates argument order.

JSC: Which is something that's in other languages.

Another thing that comes up is syntax vs functions. For demethodize, if syntax comes up would that change your opinion of these function helpers.

JHD: Value of syntax is they're undeniable. I'd still want the syntax. I'd worried about other delegates saying we don't need both.

KG: I would say that. For this as for all other syntax the value is primarily, particularly when there's no other practical way to write it, it's nice to have syntax and it can be more clearly expressed that way. E.g. `add` vs a + operator, easier to read. For any question of this form, "should we add syntax that replicates existing functionality", I'd want to evaluate it based on "is this going to much clearer as syntax". But also independently of whether you can write with API, I'd like to use the approach syntax should be used for things that are impossible or tricky-but-very-common but not-tricky-but-extremely-common (like arrow, even though you could've written `function`). For the particular question, regardless of the existence of a method, I don't think syntax is worth the cost. I'd always prefer to have the function over the syntax for this functionality.

JHD: For the syntax we've talked about the order of receiver and function. If syntax is still ordered like function, receiver, arguments, then why bother with syntax? Benefit to me would be proper order.

KG: Fair point about ordering.

MF: I do see JHD's point about undeniability. But it's an uncommon thing and we shouldn't be making decisions on language based on that. I'd be a heavy user of `unthis` but still I think the API is sufficient. I don't need undeniability of that feature. For this particular question I agree with KG to use API.

JSC: If syntax is included it's not like you'd ever use demethodize, right?

JHD: If both existed you'd always use syntax. So argument to not have both.

JSC: I think we have clear conclusions from this mtg. RGN, JHX, anything to add? If not we can call it, summarized conclusions earlier.

RGN: I think those hold. Got decent variety of opinions and I overlap with a number, and don't have new things to consider.

JSC: Thanks super much everyone. I wasn't anticipating `once` would get such strong support but in retrospect it's pretty obvious. Look forward to that. If you have opinions on what it returns on subsequent calls, lmk. I won't pursue `const` `identity` and `nop`. Will take wait-and-see approach to `flow` and `pipe`. As for `demethodize` I will push an operator instead, if it fails I'll push a function. Thanks all and happy trails.
