# August 2, 2021 Incubator Call Notes (Pattern matching)

**Attendees**:
- Sergey Rubanov (SRV)
- Bradford Smith (BSH)
- Richard Gibson (RGN)
- Shu-yu Guo (SYG)
- Jordan Harband (JHD)
- John Hax (JHX)
- Mark Cohen (MPC)

# Pattern matching

JHD: Syntax bikeshed questions might be interesting, but the important thing is are there large semantic concerns.

(Recaps proposal from https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching)

LHS of when clauses mimic object destructuring but has additional semantics (leaf patterns). RHS has do expression semantics.

JHX: What's the difference between with and as?

JHD: Champion group is discussing if we need both. 'As' is for aliasing something that's already matched. 'As' will not fail a match. 'With' chains a matcher onto the previous one.

SYG: The protocol doesn't seem to pay for itself to me. Hides complexity behind what otherwise looks like declarative syntax.

JHD: It's motivated by named capture groups in regex. Another common pattern is needing to check instanceof for various constructors. The protocol lets the different constructors put everything together behind a single symbol instead of inventing their own words.

BSH: A common pattern that comes up for me is investigating some complex object where I want to get out something deep within the object. One problem I haven't seen addressed here is that if the first match "failed" in that the deep thing isn't what I want, that I'd still need to repeat all the work I did to match the first failed match.

JHD: You're correct this isn't currently solved. Once you're in the RHS there's no way to fail the match.

BSH: Consider an AST in a compiler. Suppose I located where a variable is declared, but I haven't yet figured out if it's a let vs a var or whatever to decide what I do next. If I tried ot use this proposal, I'd match the AST up to a point. If it doesn't match I'd need to redo a lot of the work.

JHD: With a matcher protocol you could save redoing the work. (Writes on gist)

BSH: The design pattern I've ended up doing is that I do an analysis and returns an object that has all the cases built into it, and all the data I need to act on those cases.

For when and if -- what happens if you have a single "shape" with the when but you have multiple ifs?

JHD: You can repeat the shape multiple times.

BSH: That seems pretty inefficient for the engine to re-run stuff. For the human reading it it's not efficient either.

SYG: Seems like there's tension with how much expressivity the match construct should have to avoid nesting. IMO it's already too far for trying to avoid nesting. Is there a consensus in the champion group for where the tradeoff is?

JHD: Probably not much farther.

BSH: What's the minimal expressivity to have a compelling replacement for switch?

JHD: For the protocol my concern is if we don't add it now we can't add it in the future.

SYG: Well, not without additional syntax to call out to the protocol.

JHD: Right.

It's not yet clear what the controversial pieces will be. And also not clear what can be peeled off and leave a compelling feature.

RGN: The thoughts (?) of the protocol have been clarifying in lets me classify the constituent left hand side. The protocol acts on the LHS by returning a boolean on whether it matches or not, and if true, as well as returning the interesting pieces. Have I correctly captured the essence of the LHS?

JHD: Yes, that captures.

RGN: I think the minimal shape of it would probably look very similar to just the protocol, and there would be no special destructuring or matching syntax.

JHD: I would agree that's syntactically simpler but I don't think anyone would use it.


SRV: (From chat) It feels that it's possible to use regular functions inside of a matchable instead of `^ASTNode(x)` and the protocol is mainly useful for built-ins, but protocol itself adds a lot of complexity
