## Agenda

- Welcome module and module loading enthusiasts (SYG)
- Administrative (SYG)
- [Module loader harmony](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1xW82kGHOqscm1gXNzYK6WaS3pJxESzvz2tWkbyFdRHc/edit?usp=sharing) (KKL)

## Attendees

- Kris Kowal (KKL) Agoric
- Luca Casonato (LCA) Deno
- Nicolò Ribaudo (NRO) Igalia
- Jack Works (JWK) Sujitech
- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Shu-yu Guo (SYG) Google
- Leo Balter (LEO) Salesforce
- Manuel Jasso (MJN) Salesforce
- Daniel Ehrenberg (DE) Bloomberg
- Chengzhong Wu (CZW)
- Guy Bedford (GB)
- Mark S. Miller (MM) Agoric
- Mathieu Hofman (MAH) Agoric
- Peter Hoddie (PHE) Moddable
- Yulia Startsev (YSV) Mozilla
- Zbigniew Tenerowicz
- Caridy Patiño (CP) Salesforce

## Notes

SYG: (Administrative stuff)

KKL: (Presents [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1xW82kGHOqscm1gXNzYK6WaS3pJxESzvz2tWkbyFdRHc/edit?usp=sharing))

KKL: To start this talk about module harmony I'd like to tell the story of how other proposals are coming from the Compartments proposal. (Presents terminology of the Compartments proposal.) The terms are flexible since we're still only Stage 1. Would like to present the other proposals from the lens of Compartments. Then we can talk about layering and compartments API.

KKL: Terms from 262: Realm is the seat of the module graph. Module records are how we represent the lifetimes of modules wrt linkage instantiation etc. Cyclic module records are special case for ones that can participate in cycles. JSON proposals are synthetic modules, "synthetic" not a normative JS thing but is for Wasm apparently.

Compartment terms don't line up with 262. So suggests realignment for compartment terms. "Compartment" is effectively a subclass of a Realm that manages the module graph. "Static module record" is the reusable part of a module record, to factor out the static parts from the instantiation, i.e. source text. ""Virtual" static module record" is a user-provided emulation of a static module record. ATM static module records can represent cyclic module records and virtual static module records cannot. "Module descriptor" simplifies 2-3 methods, representation of how a module should be added to a compartment that the loading machinery can use, e.g. how to construct aliases. "Module instance" refers to static module record + entangled pair of module export namespace and module environment record.

MAH: Just quick clarification. Does that mean the Module, That means the module instance record is the one that is tied to compartments ?, currently tied to a realm but we'd be tied to a compartment.


KKL: Through lens of compartments this is what module blocks would look like. A module block represents a static module record. [In compartment thinking] their identity is unimportant.

Import reflection through lens of compartments API is simply the static module record constructor that returns a set of bindings.

Which is to say if module blocks through lens of compartments are static module records then there is module block import reflection as well.

Deferred execution can be thought of importing static modules then executing them later.
XS compartments allow for static module records to be passed from the host compartment to a guest compartment. This is important because their entire working set is precompiled to bytecode. Delegating a module from host to guest allows the host to reassign names such that they can link properly in the context of the child compartment’s resolveHook. Resolve hooks are host-dependent and so host-virtualizable, so not necessarily the same between host and guest compartments. The same static module record can be linked against a different referrer specifier in the context of a Compartment.

DE: I like how this unifies things in a common model. I have a question about how the identity of the module blocks makes it unimportant. It'd be great if the identity was unimportant as it's an open question. How does this do that?

KKL: It does so by a compromise, so there is a design tension. The two possibilities of what a module block gets as its value is either a static module record as illustrated here, or, something that corresponds more closely to a module descriptor with its corresponding key. What you do not get on the static module record is the import.meta and the referrer. The referrer is the base off which its imports get resolved once it's resolved in a compartment. It'd need to get its module specifier from somewhere when transferred to another comparmtnet. My opinion is those things should be determined by the compartment in which it's being linked. We should not change the way how a static module record get into a compartment, for simplicity let's say the only way to get a static module record is returned via a load hook. The way to transfer a static module record from one compartment to another is to do it via the load hook. It means a great deal of flexibility but it does not mean you can push modules into other compartments, they'd have to be pulled in.

DE: I agree this simplifies things but I was hoping there'd be import.meta. If you're using the syntax you'd want that, don't you think?

KKL: I agree it'd be convenient but don't know how to make it work. Perhaps we can have both if module blocks corresponded more to something like a module descriptor: a static module record + additional context like import specifier. You could do everything I said about transferring with these additional-context-from-local-compartment module descriptors. Through the lens of the compartment API these are the two options: either these are static module blocks, or these are things that contain the static module blocks.

MM: In advantage of the descriptor class, the module static record itself is still extractable and usable without the context.

DE: Let's continue discussing this offline, thanks for raising.

YSV: I'm getting lost around what the descriptor between module records and module descriptors is doing. My reading of module record is it was intended to be static but we've mixed module instance in there. I would actually see module record be the static form and module instance be the dynamic form. But what I'm getting lost on is what the descriptor is adding, you mentioned context?

KKL: A module record closes over info that exists only in the source text. None of the properties of the module record come from anywhere else except the text. It doesn't contain the referrer full specifier (the key it'd have in the module graph) and the corresponding import.meta, which are external.

YSV: So basically its specifier and import.meta objects are removed from it. Right?

KKL: Right. Let's say yes for now.

YSV: Why do we want those two fields (specifier + import.meta) separate? What's enabled by the separation?

KKL: Original motivating use case for separation was proposal for original compartments from XS. For their purposes they precompile a ROM they build the full graph up front and embed the static module records in ROM. This includes bytecode and analysis of bindings. The neat thing you can do in that model is essentially deferred execution: I'll compile all the modules I'll ever need but in the entry Realm it'll depend on a small set of that. It'll create a child compartments and pass in the static module records in, and the child compartments can have arbitrary names for these static module records. The second reason the import specifier is resolved host-dependently, so the specifier don't necessarily correspond to module graph keys. Because that's host-specific, the resolve hook allows these to be host virtualizable. The compartment represents the host.

JWK: If we're reifying the module graph as the module descriptor are we losing ability that was presented at the module blocks presentation?

KKL: Let's assume a module block is reified as a module descriptor (module record + specifier + import.meta). To push a module into a compartment [...]

JWK: I'm not talking about using Compartments.import, I'm talking about using native host dynamic import.

KKL: The reason I answered the way I did is because I feel it's a desirable invariant that the import method of the module loader object (comparment or whatever we name it) behave identically to dynamic import except where it picks up the referrer.

JWK: Second question. You want to reify module blocks as module descriptors that has import.meta. But import.meta has unknown shape just by the info in the source text. How can that be compiled without running?

KKL: The load hook can decide what goes into the import.meta object. We had realized recently it is not necessary to have an import.meta hook.

GB: I want to mention there is a CSP thing that there is info associated with static module records that sits outside of ecma262 and what ecma262 can reason about. This is a strong design principle. There's still a bunch of host metadata that's still associated with a module record that's able to maintained. Want to mention the constraint. I wonder if this is invisible host-dependent metadata that's not exposed. Do you want to expose that or can we allow it to remain opaque? Import.meta as well. If there's out-of-band info the host wants to use to fill in things on import.meta.

KKL: If it is the case there's additional host metadata that must be held away from host virtualization hooks, the static module record object is actually opaque for the purposes of the language except for the purposes of reflection. I could see the same arrangement for module descriptors.

Moving on, motivation for compartments. Bundlers, archivers, import-map and generators and runtimes. Compartments have a load hook. Test watchers because compartments are GC-able.

Design points: surface the language's module evaluator. Success criterion: motivating use cases no longer require a JS metaparser. Success criterion: any host can emulate any other host. Idea here is if I were on node I can write a compartment that emulates the behavior of the web or deno. Invariant: within a module graph an import must be idempotent. Compartments memoize both load and import. Do not surface module record machinery. The other reason to avoid surfacing a module instance is to avoid surfacing loading machinery.

Question: to reify or not reify ModuleInstance. I think we should not but still open question.

Question: is a module block a StaticModuleRecord? Still open question. I'm going to revise "almost certainly yes" to "maybe yes" and maybe revise to use module descriptors.

Question: how various are resolve hooks? Web uses full URLs, node doesn't. XS uses full specifiers as UNIX paths from root. Ful specifiers in bundlers must not be fully qualified filesystem paths.

SYG: How does this square with import maps?

KKL: Import maps can be thought of as either input to a compartment or the product of a compartment. Very similar to a bundler except it doesn't have the source directly, it has references to sources. Import maps can be emulated with the Compartments API. That doesn't preclude the host compartment from having an import map implementation that is radically different.

SYG: Do you want people to reach for compartments or import maps if they have a simple use case? How power user is the Compartent API?

KKL: Very power user. Akin to eval, and compartments are like eval for modules.

GB: There's no way to retrieve the import map on a page. Could compartments default to some host mapping system or do we want it to be a fresh slate?

KKL: Open proposals on which way to lean on defaults. It's my intention for compartments proposal to land in a place where inheriting the host compartment's machinery is a possibility with an opt-in or opt-out, or a hybrid of the two.

(KKL: I believe DE at this point affirmed that he favors compartments/loaders inheriting the host’s loader machinery by default, like realms)

SYG: Is your concrete proposal to have compartments be the explanatory proposal that underpins all the other module proposals?

KKL: Yes. I've been mulling a refactoring of a simpler thing that could land first (and have failed to find a way to decompose the compartments proposal that leaves a useful artifact for others to build upon)

YSL: Please rename compartments to something else we'd have to rewrite SM which already has a notion of compartment.

GB: With a lens of compartments it'd be great to take a look at the other proposals and see what the other proposals depend on. The layering question and investigate that would be great. The dependence question is an important one.

SYG: Concrete AI for other champions for next call: do you agree with the proposal to have Compartments be the underpinning proposal.

## Transcript of Google Meet Chat

Romulo Cintra9:06 AM
Module Fragments - https://github.com/tc39/proposal-module-fragments

Romulo Cintra9:09 AM
There are folks in  "waiting room"
ok it's joining again :)

Yulia Startsev9:22 AM
small comment -- my reading always was that the record was the static information per the text "A Source Text Module Record is used to represent information *about* a module"

Daniel Ehrenberg9:23 AM
The current spec conflates "static" and "dynamic" modules; my reading was that Source Text Module Records are understood as "dynamic"/instances.
and that there's just no representation of a "static" module; it's just copied onto the instance

Yulia Startsev9:25 AM
yeah, the confusion exists

Yulia Startsev9:28 AM
this was just a small comment rather about naming -- i would see the change being module record and module instance, rather than static and dynamic module record

Daniel Ehrenberg9:40 AM
I'm really interested in understanding the interaction of all of this, but I also would like to see Kris's presentation of the rest of the slides... maybe this just necessarily spills into next meeting
about this push/pull race condition: in the context of module blocks, I was imagining that imports from inside the module would generally be resolved from within the compartment pushed into (with the exception of module fragments that are directly "closed over"... more detail needed)

Daniel Ehrenberg9:44 AM
concretely: Hosts need to be able to mark `module { }` as different from `Module("")`

Yulia Startsev9:46 AM
i think the host manages its per-module metadata in ScriptFetchOptions iirc? or is this another?
this is separate from dan's concern.

Daniel Ehrenberg9:48 AM
I'm not sure if that works for this or if we'd need a new place to thread CSP through modules (since no modules come from eval at the moment; inserting a script tag is blocked differently)
On our 262 side, I think the main thing we need is to call the appropriate host hooks and host metadata slots which don't yet exist; I agree with Guy that these may offer  possibilities for simplifications

Yulia Startsev9:49 AM
i believe, for dynamic import, we use the referencing script to get the script fetch options

Yulia Startsev9:51 AM
i don't know if we need additional slots for this, at least -- the way this has been implemented so far was fully on the DOM side and not touching JS

Daniel Ehrenberg9:52 AM
yeah good point
+1 to not reifying module instances; I'd be interested in hearing Guy's thoughts

Yulia Startsev9:53 AM
i am getting a little lost -- what does reifying module instance mean?

Daniel Ehrenberg9:53 AM
like, should we just use the module export object that exists right now, or make another thing as Guy proposed?
I guess Guy's proposal amounted to shorthand for making a mini compartment and then doing the import

Daniel Ehrenberg9:55 AM
Module fragments/descriptor-full module blocks might complicate what a module specifier is (creating an additional level somehow)

Daniel Ehrenberg9:56 AM
+1 to the import assertions slide

Daniel Ehrenberg10:00 AM
+1 to deferring to the host is the default (as with Realms)

Caridy Patino10:06 AM
same here

